+++
title = "A new optical density granulometry-based descriptor for the classification of prostate histological images using shallow and deep Gaussian processes"

# Date first published.
date = "2019-07-04"

# Authors. Comma separated list, e.g. `["Bob Smith", "David Jones"]`.
authors = ["Ángel E. Esteban", "Miguel López-Pérez", "Adrián Colomer", "María A. Sales", "Rafael Molina", "Valery Naranjo"]

# Publication type.
# Legend:
# 0 = Uncategorized
# 1 = Conference proceedings
# 2 = Journal
# 3 = Work in progress
# 4 = Technical report
# 5 = Book
# 6 = Book chapter
publication_types = ["2"]

# Publication name and optional abbreviated version.
publication = "*Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine*. Volume 178, September 2019, Pages 303-317. "
publication_short = "*Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine*"

# Abstract and optional shortened version.
abstract = "Background and objective: Prostate cancer is one of the most common male tumors. The increasing use of whole slide digital scanners has led to an enormous interest in the application of machine learning techniques to histopathological image classification. Here we introduce a novel family of morphological descriptors which, extracted in the appropriate image space and combined with shallow and deep Gaussian process based classifiers, improves early prostate cancer diagnosis. Method: We decompose the acquired RGB image in its RGB and optical density hematoxylin and eosin components. Then, we define two novel granulometry-based descriptors which work in both, RGB and optical density, spaces but perform better when used on the latter. In this space they clearly encapsulate knowledge used by pathologists to identify cancer lesions. The obtained features become the inputs to shallow and deep Gaussian process classifiers which achieve an accurate prediction of cancer. Results: We have used a real and unique dataset. The dataset is composed of 60 Whole Slide Images. For a five fold cross validation, shallow and deep Gaussian Processes obtain area under ROC curve values higher than 0.98. They outperform current state of the art patch based shallow classifiers and are very competitive to the best performing deep learning method. Models were also compared on 17 Whole Slide test Images using the FROC curve. With the cost of one false positive, the best performing method, the one layer Gaussian process, identifies 83.87% (sensitivity) of all annotated cancer in the Whole Slide Image. This result corroborates the quality of the extracted features, no more than a layer is needed to achieve excellent generalization results. Conclusion: Two new descriptors to extract morphological features from histological images have been proposed. They collect very relevant information for cancer detection. From these descriptors, shallow and deep Gaussian Processes are capable of extracting the complex structure of prostate histological images. The new space/descriptor/classifier paradigm outperforms state-of-art shallow classifiers. Furthermore, despite being much simpler, it is competitive to state-of-art CNN architectures both on the proposed SICAPv1 database and on an external database."
abstract_short = "We present a novel and fast method for cancer detection. This method is based on the new optical density granulometry descriptor and the introducton of gaussian processes in this task. This method is tested in our SICAPv1 database (which is available online) with competitive results to state-of-art deep learning methods and outperforming current state of the art of shallow methods."
 
# Featured image thumbnail (optional)
image_preview = ""

# Is this a selected publication? (true/false)
selected = true

# Projects (optional).
#   Associate this publication with one or more of your projects.
#   Simply enter the filename (excluding '.md') of your project file in `content/project/`.
#   E.g. `projects = ["deep-learning"]` references `content/project/deep-learning.md`.
projects = []

# Links (optional).
url_pdf = ""
url_preprint = ""
url_code = ""
url_dataset = "https://cvblab.synology.me/PublicDatabases/SICAPv1.zip"
url_project = ""
url_slides = ""
url_video = ""
url_poster = ""
url_source = ""

# Custom links (optional).
#   Uncomment line below to enable. For multiple links, use the form `[{...}, {...}, {...}]`.
url_custom = [{name = "Article", url = "https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0169260719303906"}]

# Does the content use math formatting?
math = true

# Does the content use source code highlighting?
highlight = true

# Featured image
# Place your image in the `static/img/` folder and reference its filename below, e.g. `image = "example.jpg"`.
[header]
image = "headers/bubbles-wide.jpg"
caption = "My caption 😄"

+++

